2013-02-27 Wed
-----------------
Lecture 19

<Lectures_18 & 19 PDF - slide 30> Acid hydrolases are sorted...

why distinguish the lysosomal hydrolases from all the others with an M6P tag?
    M6P = mannose 6-phosphate

signal seq. vs. signal patch

GlcNAc phosphotransferase - recognizes signal patch for acid hydrolases
    (uses recognition domain in cis-Golgi)

    UDP-GlcNAc energy second only to ATP
        = U-P-P-GlcNAc

    GlcNAc-P-Mannose  => P-Mannose
        (UMP comes off)

How is M6P recognized by the sorting machinery?
    pH is very different

Inclusion Cell Disease
    no GlcNAc phosphotransferase activity (no M6P attached)
    ***what happens?

--
Transport from Golgi to Secretory Vesicles & p.m.
    the TGN is the major sorting station in biosynthetic pathways

        exterior->endosome->lysosome pathway occurs in all cell types
        constitutive pathway occurs in all cell types -- no coat necessary
        regulated secretion is distinct from the above (regulated secretion)
            - b-clathrin involved

    TGN-to-p.m. transport
        constitutive secretion is generally though to be a default pathway and...
            unregulated membrane fusion

            "we really don't understand a lot of this secretion pathway"

    intracellular trafficking and cell polarity
        epithelial cells - apical and basolateral domains
        
        nerve cells - has dendrites and axons

        for these polarized cells, must be signals present for targeting to
        different parts of the p.m.

    polarized TGN-to-plasma memb. transport
        lipid rafts are assembled in the Golgi

        lipid rafts may not be the only apical-targeting signal

        in contrast, several basolateral-targeting signals (short AA seqs) are known

    multiple ways to generate polarity by polarized transport
        direct vs. indirect sorting
        indirect has some evidence:
            some apical proteins found on basolateral, but no basolateral proteins
            found on apical surface

    in addition to the polarized trafficking, molecular fences...
        molecular fences - prevent mixing of p.m. proteins btwn two domains

        tight junction -

        axonal hillock - separates cell body and axon
            - permeability barrier

            - action potential starts here

    
    ---
    regulated TGN-to-PM transport (the above is unregulated pathway)
    
    formation of specialied secretory vesicles
        clathrin coat -> immature secretory vesicle -> concentrated into a mature sec. ves.
        acidity increases with maturation

    docking/fusion as a critical control switch...
        #

    what might be the advantage...
        rapid & concentrated release

    how does a physiological signal release the docking/fusion of...
        ###

    how to link blood glucose...
        "do not have to memorize"

    adipocytes and muscle cells remove blood sugar...
        vesicles with GLUT4 glucose transporters on them, ready to fuse with p.m.
            insulin => activation of TC10 => fusion of GLUT4 vesicles with p.m.

    allergic reactions...
        mast cells are full of histamine secretory granules



----end of 18&19 PDF; beginning of 19&20 PDF-----
the endocytic / endosomal pathway

the pathways...
    endocytosis pathway (internaliation)

    endosomal pathway (post-internalization)

    recycling pathway
