2013-01-25 Fri.
--------------
Lecture 7

[ 10 min. late]

Integral Membrane Proteins
    single transmembrane domain as an alpha-helix (and modified by a lipid)

    beta barrel ###

Mechanisms of conversion of a single-chain multi-pass protein into a two chain
multi-pass protein.

    A) a protease cuts it into two pieces
    B) a separate gene for each of the two fragments

Common features of an integral membrane protein
    extracellular:
        disulfide bords
        oligosaccharides
    intracellular:
        -SH (cytosol is reducing environment)

approaches for biochemical and structural of a membrane protein:
    1988 nobel prize in chemistry - huber, michel, hausenhofer(?) - 3D struct. of a
    photosynthetic reaction center (of a bacterium)

hydrophobic amino acids are essential in transmembrane proteins

hydropathy plots of integral transmembrane proteins

common properties of a protein alpha-helix
    It is the most abundant secondary struct. of proteins
    Generally goes in a circle with a pitch - 3.6 residues per turn (0.54nm)
    N-H of every peptide bond forms an H-bond w/ the C=O of a neighboring peptde bond 4 away
    Protein is rarely found in middle - disruptive

Takes about 20-30 AAs to get through a lipid bilayer

Properties of a protein beta-strand/sheet
    A more extended config. than the protein alpha helix.
    The N-H of every peptide bind forms an H-bond w/ the C=O of another peptide bond
    located in the neighboring strand

lipid-anchored membrane proteins
    saccharolipid

peripheral membrane proteins
    a protein may become periph. assoc. w/ the membrane by its interaction w/ another
    membrane protein. The nature of this interaction is usually hydrophilic

detecting lateral movement of proteins in the membrane
    ex: mouse & human cells are fused -> heterokaryon
        never gonna survive, but can metabolize normally for a very short time
        human & mouse membrane proteins diffuse throughout
        use Ab probes to study

fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
    cell is transfected to express a fluorescent protein on its membrane
    a laser beam is used to quench the signal (bleaches it)
    observe the recovery time (the time it takes to become green again)

multiple ways that lateral mobility of a membrane protein is restricted
    forming aggregates
        (increased mass)
    anchored from inside
        (e.g.: via cytoskeleton assoc.)
    anchored from extracellular space
        (e.g.: via ECM assoc.)
    anchored from neighboring cells
        (e.g.: via interacting w/ other cells)

Major types of membrane proteins in terms of function:
    transporters (carriers, permeases)
        - mostly large, hydrophilic molecules
        - may require energy
    channels
        - move ions & waters in & out of cell or compartment
        - never require energy
    receptors
        - relay signals btwn. two compartments w/o the actual movement of sig.
          molecules across the membrane
    others
        enzymes, struct. proteins, etc.

Transport of molecules across the membrane is essential to cells

Functions of membrane transport
    to ingest essential nutrients
    to excrete metabolic waste or toxic products
    to regulate intracellular composition (signalling)
