2013-02-01 Fri
----------------
Lecture 11

*** review session: next wed (Feb 6) at 8:30pm in lsb 1001 (same room as m103)


*** Watch Dead Poet's Society
    "live an extraordinary life"

Michaelis-Menten equation was originally "invariable"
    then enzymes like PFK came along and overturned this claim of invariability

Picture it this way: M-M vs. cooperativity
    and even with cooperativity:
        some models fit better than others: concerted vs. sequential

For a cooperative enzyme:
    at low conc:  displays concerted cooperative behavior
    at high conc: displays M-M behavior

Phosphofructokinase:
    two distinct things:
        cooperative
        uses ATP and AMP as allosteric ligands

    ### check out "PFK" slide

    ATP and AMP compete for the allosteric site
    ATP has a choice of binding for the active site or the allosteric site

    F2,6BP - discovered in last 15 years
        also made from F6P, but P goes on different carbon than F1,6BP
        if it's around, it potently drives PFK to active form
        see enzymes: PFK2 and FBPase 2 (forward and reverse, respectively)

PFK2 & FBPase2are encoded with the same protein!
    First three important points on this slide:
        1. if Glu increases after a meal, the amount of F2,6BP will also increase
        2. because F26BP drives PFK into active form, this drives PFK up
        3. increased glucose results in increase in glycolysis
            - if Glu levels are high in the blood, we must store it as fat, and Acetyl CoA
              is needed for this

        not as important: kinase and phosphatase (PFK2&FBPase2) exist on same polypeptide

<left graph>
    the first thing when you look at a graph: the X and Y axes
    Y: catalytic activity of PFK
    X: conc. of F6P (the substrate)
    the different curves are 3 different concentrations of F26BP (allosteric activator)

    0 uM F26BP:   typical sigmoidal
    0.1 uM F26BP: 

    in the absence of F26BP, we get the red curve because maj. of enzyme is in tense state;
    in the presence of F26BP, the tense state is driven over to the relaxed state
        - the more relaxed, the more M-M-like it looks

<right graph>
    Y: catalytic activity of PFK
    X: conc. of ATP (second substrate)

    goes up and then goes down (as ATP conc. increases)
        why? more competition at the allosteric site
            - the active site has higher affinity for ATP than does the allosteric site

    at higher concentrations of ATP, starts to bind the allosteric site, which
    causes PFK to go into tense state

    in the presence of F26BP, we drive more of the enzyme into the active form
        => at any ATP conc., there is more activity

    why is the binding of F6P cooperative, but the binding of ATP is not?
        cooperative behavior always appears when you go from tense state to relaxed state


other effectors of PFK activity:
    ###

inhibition of PFK by H+ and citrate
    PFK takes a proton from lactic acid dissoc. into lactate
        gotta be allosteric?!?

Summary:
    PFK - cooperativity
    hexokinase - product inhibition
        - phosphorylates a hexose on C6
        glucose -> G6P

        G6P is structurally similar to glucose, and competes with glucose for
        active site of hexokinase
            - the P does not interfere with the tight binding at the active site

        if products bind to the active site well, they shut off the enzyme

Hexokinase (Glucose -> GFP)
    In muscle:
        Km^Glucose ~ 0.1 mM
        Potentially inhibited by product, G6P
        ### SEE SLIDE
        if G6P builds up and it shuts off glucose transporter, does that make sense? yes
        what mechanism? allosteric regulation (by definition)
            - gotta bind to some site OTHER THAN the active site

    In liver:
        the equiv. enzyme in liver is not inhibited by G6P
            because Km^Glucose is high (5mM)

        at high Glu conc.
        
        we want to store G6P as glycogen, so we cannot afford to engineer a high ###
