2013-04-11
-----------------
Lecture 4

Review:
    focusing on gastrulation

    fates of ectoderm:
        surface
            hair
            dermis
            nails
        neural crest
            PNS
            various
        neural tube
            CNS

    cell shape changes - think "cytoskel."

    cell re-arrangements - think "cell adhesion molecules (CAMs)"

    Hans Spemann
    
    inductive signal -> nearby cells directed to new developmental pathway

    determination vs. differentiation
        determination - the point at which a cell is committed
        differentiation - the point at which the cell changes its phenotype

    transplantation type of experiment for "determination"

    embryonic fragments and determination/fates

    Spemann and Mangold, 1924: transplant -> get two nervous systems

    identification of noggin as a neural inducer
        Bill Smith is now dept. chair in MCDB

Neuralization factors
    Noggin
    Chordin
    Follastatin

Blocking signaling via a dom. neg. activin receptor leads to neuralization
    it's the _absence_ of a signal that leads to neurons!!!

Dissoc. of animal cap cells prior to gastrulation causes them to differentiate
into neurons in culture

universal mechanisms of animal dev.
    sog (fly homolog of Chordin)
        sog knockout -> expanded epidermal region and reduced neurogenic region
        sog increase -> neuralization of non-neural regions

    sog interacts genetically w/ dpp: they antagonize each other

    dpp knockout -> exact opposite of sog knockout
    dpp increase -> epidermalization of neural regions

is there a dpp homolog in vertebrates: yes! BMP-4 (bone morphogenetic protein 4)

we want to know what antagonizes noggin, chordin, and follastatin in mammals

BMP-4:
    widely expressed in gastrula
    lower levels in Spemann's organizer and animal cap
    if you add loads of BMP-4, it suppresses neural induction by chordin or noggin
    mesoderm/notochord releases something that interferes with BMP-4 (suppress the suppressor)

<figure 1.23 current model of neural induction> ***interesting

the default fate of ectoderm is neural
    ###

why would inhibiting the activin receptor cause neuralization?
    because the activin receptor is closely related to the BMP4 receptor
    the truncated activin receptor can form a heterodimer w/ the BMP4 receptor

    therefore, the truncated activin receptor is a dominant negative for both activin
    receptor AND the BMP4 receptor

TGF[beta] family of ligands
    activin
    BMP4
    (others)

functional redundancy:
    noggin knockout mouse has same phenotype as wildtype mouse
    noggin/chordin double knockout mouse has different phenotype!

the bigger molecular picture
    to become neural, we need to express neural genes
        two major transcriptional activators: Zic1 and Zic3
        Zic1 is on by default
        Zic3 is activated by FGF (via sig. cascade involving ERK)

        BMP-4 binds to BMP receptor => activates Smad => goes to nucleus => inhibits Zic1
                                                                            transcription
                            (Smad also activates other epidermal genes)

neurulation occurs earlier in the anterior end
    (embryo is now elongated like a finger)
    neural tube does not form at same time over the whole length (earlier at anterior)

    in humans around day 30, neural tube must seal up so that inside can have different
    composition; if tube does not close up at anterior end, death; if tube is a little
    open at posterior end, spina bifida

--------------------------------------
(next slides)

proliferation and differentiation of the nervous system

lots of:
    proliferation
    migration
    differentiation

neural tube at anterior end is going to start to get bigger (notochord is right under)

neural tube develops into 3 regions:
    forebrain
        cerebral hemispheres
    midbrain
        adult midbrain
    hindbrain
        lower brain stem
    
    (the rest: spinal cord)

    neural tube has ventricular zone inside
    underneath the neural tube is the notochord

    the neural tube cells divide to have layers / concentric circles

    "cells that are dividing have to synthesize DNA"
        10 minute "pulse" of radioactive thymidine
        after washing, put the cells over X-ray film
        you can see which cells were synthesizing DNA

    embryo -> 3H thymidine for 10 min -> label the subset of cells that are prolif ->
    wash out inincorporated thymidine -> photographic emulsion -> time -> develop film

        Results: only the innermost layer has dividing cells
            speculation: maybe there are factors on the inside inducing cells to divide?

    proliferation occurs only in cells at inside of neural tube
    possibilities:
        1. new cells push the outer layers further outward
        2. new cells migrate past outer layers to become the new outermost layer
        3. combination of 1 and 2

    "pulse chase" experiment:

    embryo -> 3H thymidine 10min -> label dividing cells -> for 24 hours, add excess of
    non-radioactive thymidine -> add photographic emulsion -> time -> develop film

        Result: labeled cells in innermost layer, but also some labeled cells in the outer-
        most layer -> the cells must have migrated through the layers
            note that each labeled cell has half the radioactivity as in the previous expt.

    increase chase time from 24 to 48 hours:
        Result: labeled cells in innermost, outermost, and layer under outermost!
                -> cells dividing multiple times in innermost layer, and some of the daughter
                cells from each division migrate to form new layers

                relative radiation levels tell you that the outer layer cells are not
                dividing at all; formed only by migration from innermost layer

    plane of division:
        if radial, both stay
        if not radial, one leaves

    how do cells "wiggle on through" the layers?
        radial glial cells - long skinny cells that run the whole width of the neural tube
            (along a radius)
            cells that need to migrate use these as a guide
