2013-04-16 Tues
---------------------

*** midterm next thursday (4/25)

epidermis
neural crest
neural tube
ventricular zone (inside the neural tube)

anterior
posterior

neuroblast proliferation occurs in the neural tube...
where in the tube is cell division occurring?
    3H thymidine "pulse" and "pulse-chase" labelling experiments

birth-dating studies reveal "inside-out" org. of the cerebral cortex
    pregnant female mice
    inject one w/ tritiated thymidine at E11 (day 11 of preg.)
    inject another at E13, and yet another at E15

migration of neurons along radial glia
    radial glia
    if a cell near the VZ divides, one stays there, and the other migrates
    along the radial glia

    as the neural tube gets bigger, the radial glia stretch farther

monoclonal vs. polyclonal Ab's

migration of neurons along radial glia
    CAMs - cell adhesion molecules
    neuronal CAMs
    ***3 good candidate CAMs
        NCAM
        N-cadherin
        L1

    function-blocking Ab's

    if we measure the rate of control cells, we get 33 microns/hr
    how would the rate change if we added:
        Ab's against NCAM?          33um/hr
        Ab's against N-cadherin?    33um/hr
        Ab's against L1?            33um/hr

    Ab's to all 3                   33um/hr :(

    conclusion: maybe none of these are involved

    what if we got some neuronal cell membranes, injected them into a rabbit, and
    got antiserum against membrane proteins?
        with luck, we would get a fcn-blockig Ab
        we get a rate of close to zero :)

    hypothesis: whatever the protein on membrane interacting w/glia is, it is present
    on embryonic but not adult neuronal membrane

        test: into the serum, they add neural memb. chunks from adult
        incubate -> spin -> neuronal memb. chunks in pellet + Ab's that react w/ adult

        in supernatant will be Ab's that do not react w/ adult memb.
            one of these Ab's was found to be a fcn-blocking Ab against migration!

        "low probability of payoff, but high payoff; they won the lottery"

        result: found a protein called astrotactin: necessary for migration along glia

astrotactin knock-out mice:
    cerebella are 10% smaller than WT
    decreased assoc. btwn. neurons & glia
    reduced rate of neuronal migration
    abnormal devel. of cerebella
    poor balance and coordination

amyloid precursor protein (APP)
    transmemb. protein
    RNAi knockdown leads to abberant migration & aberrant layer formation

    if add excess APP, migration proceeds too far
        goes right past end of radial glia

    ###

semaphorin 3A
    not a CAM; it is a diffusable protein
    forms a gradient, from ventricular zone to exterior of NT
    chemoattractant for migrating neurons

neuroblast prolif. occurs in the neural tube, but how do the "cortical layers" form?

------
what kinds of cells are derived from a single cell at VZ?
    determined or not?

retrovirus
    infection of cells by retroviruses is very inefficient

    once you infect a cell, it is forever marked

    put lacZ in retrovirus => cells will turn blue

mitogenic factors
    FGF, EGF, Shh
    paracrine interactions
    in this case, they tell the cells that do not migrate to keep dividing

    if you block Shh signaling, you get a big reduction in the number of neurons
    if you increase Shh signaling, you get a big increase in the number of neurons

adult neurogenesis in canary and rodents
    olfactory bulb (but the new neurons migrate from elsewhere)
    hippocampus
