2013-04-18 Thur
---------------------
Lecture 6

midterm will be through today (not tues 4/23 - lecture 7)

review:
    prolif. & diff. of nervous system
    migration of neurons along radial glia
    cell adhesion molecules mediate this - used polyclonal Ab's to determine this
    amyloid precursor protein (APP)
    semaphorin 3A - not a CAM; diffusable protein
        gradient from ventricular zone (VZ) to exterior of NT
        chemoattractant for migrating neurons

--
differentiation: intrinsic and/or extrinsic?

the environment can influence the fate of neural crest cells
    cholinergic(parasympathetic) vs. adrenergic(sympathetic) neurons

    if move cells from cholinergic region to adrenergic region - they change!

    unlike chick cells, quail cells have very prominent nucleoli, so it can be
    ruled out that the transplanted cells simply died from the trauma, and
    neighboring cells filled in

determining position in a fly, or how do cells "know" where they are in embryo?
    maternal effect genes:
        bicoid protein - very high abundance in anterior end; very low in posterior end
        nanose protein - opposite
    very asymmetric right from the start

    cyto. polarity => gap genes => pair rule genes => seg. polarity genes & homeotic genes

anterior-posterior polarity of the nervous system: retinoic acid
    different levels of retinoic acid activate different genes
    about a 10 fold gradient - highest at the posterior end of the notochord
    extra RA - defects in anterior NT devel.
    RA promotes posterior nervous sys. devel.

    animal caps (dissoc or not)--treat w/ noggin-> _anterior_ neural fate ->
        FGF -> posterior fate

        conclusion: RA and noggin are opposites (FGF is also posteriorizing)

dorsal-ventral organization of neural tube
    most dorsal cells of NT are roof plate; most ventral cells are floor plate

    influence of notochord on dorsal-ventral polarity of neural tube cell fate
        remove notochord - no floor plate and no motor neurons
        move notochord to side - ectopic floor plate & ectopic motor neurons

        protein responsible: Shh - induces ventralization of the neural tube
            note: once the floor plate develops, it _also_ produces Shh
            meaning of BMP changes: earlier, it was: "don't become a neuron"
                                        now, it is: "become a dorsal neuron"

        BMP causes roof plate to form; Wnt involved somehow ###

        cells are sensitive to very small differences in Shh concentration

growth factors present in different regions of the CNS can influence cell fate determination


---------------------
Lecture set 4 - axonal outgrowth and guidance

course outline:
fertilization -> blastula -> gastrula -> neurula
    neuroblast prolif.
    neuroblast diff.

    neuroblast migration
        nav.
        mechanical movement
    ***axon outgrowth
        nav
        mech. movement

    synaptogenesis
    prog. cell death
    synaptic rearrangements
    active cell maintenance
    neurodegeneration

--
migration
    cell-cell contact
    soluble gradient

target(1)   <--------neuron----
            ^ growth cone

neuron is searching for environmental cues ("five dollar word for 'road signs'")
    the growth cone projects fingers called filopodia - the little spikes
    in between the spikes are veils of membrane - lamellopodia
    
    these are very big - avg. cell body ~15um in diameter; filopodia are ~50-100um long

cell/growth cone movement involves reaching forward, grabbing the surface,
pulling and reaching forward again - tension is generated

diff. shapes & speeds of growth cones in diff. environments
    when you approach a fork in the road, you slow down to buy yourself time to decide

important nav. "roadsigns": guidepost/stepping stone cells
    sensory neurons in grasshoppers
    Ti1 is extending an axon towards the CNS - bumps into guidepost cells along the way
    guidepost cells

axons grow from retina to tectum using growth cones ###
    you can cut the axon, and it will continue migrating for a bit

time lapse images of two neurons growing in optic tract
    GFP-labeled growth cones

single filopodia can direct growth cones
    the filopodia touching the target (or guide post) gets stronger and the others get weaker

short- and long-range guidance cues
    contact repulsion - "guard rails on the freeway; stay on the road"

two mechanisms for cell/growth cone nav.
    1. guidance by differential prefs for insoluble roadways
        growing axons encounter many diff. microenvironments
        growth cones are attracted to some and repelled by others (some are neutral)
            if neutral, probably doesn't have a receptor
        attractants are like "molecular roadways"
        repellants can be viewed as "guardrails on a road"

        growth cones preferentially migrate on the most adhesive surface:
            polyornithine - very sticky; neurons like this
            palladium - very unsticky
        growth cones and adhesion
            when growth cones hit the palladium, they just leave

        examples of adhesion molecules expr. on growth cones (all assoc. intracellularly
        w/ cytoskel. elements)
            cadherins, CAMs, integrins, etc.

        if there is a roadway of laminin, after receptor attachment, the cytoskel. needs
        to change

    2. ###
