2013-04-30 Tues
-------------------
Lecture 8
[10min late!]

Adhesive gradients do not direct growth cones (laminin gradient)
    above the minimum, growth cones are happy, regardless of level

Netrin-1 - synthesized by floor plate
    dorsal commissural interneurons send axons down to floor plate

    experiments:
        cut out these neurons, along with floor plate => axons migrate to floor plate
        cut out these neurons, put next to Cos cells
        expressing Netrin-1 => axons migrate toward Cos cells!

wnt-4
    once dorsal cell axons get to the floor plate, they move up wnt-4 gradient (anterior)
    evidence: can place Cos cells expr. wnt-4 at posterior => axons move posterior
        tz3 knockout => axons move randomly

ventral neurons are repelled by a netrin gradient

cAMP levels in the growth cone control whether Netrin is attractant or repellant
    high - attractant
    low - repellant

----
cytoskeleton

microtubules
actin filaments
neurofilaments

non-ionic detergents can solubilize plasma membrane, but do not denature proteins
    you get a fibrous network that goes all the way out to the p.m. - cytoskel.

MTs are non-covalent polymers
    assembled from alpha- and beta-tubulin subunits, plus "MAPs"
    ~25nm in diameter
    alpha-beta-tubulin heterodimer - main component
    MAPs - microtubule associated proteins
        also tau, hi MW MAPs - these regulate MT dynamics
        kinesin, dynein - molecular motors

    MTs are found in bundles in the axons

MFs - actin and actin-assoc. proteins
    8nm diameter
    actin polymers
    G-actin ~ 43 kDa protein
    also very dynamic

neurofilaments - "a very small part of our story"
    more relevance in adult than in developing neurons
    3 NF proteins
    relatively static

filopodia "are all about the actin cytoskeleton"
    need ligands binding to receptors to maintain the actin

in axons, around the MTs - just underneath the membrane:
    cortical sheath of actin filaments

a small number of MTs _are_ making their way out to the edge of the growth cones

rhodamine-tubulin (fluorescent)
    microinject into axon
    take laser beam, blast area in center - tubulin is fine, but rhodamine is bleached
    let some time pass...
    where is the bleached region now? in the same place!
        easy interpretation: MTs are being built up at the growth cone (not sliding along)

what about the membrane?
    look at specks of dust on the membrane - do they move over time? yes!
        easy interpretation: membrane is being added everywhere, not just near growth cone

how does cytoskel. promote growth cone mobility?
    drug studies:
        neurons in culture, treat w/ NGF => nice neurite outgrowth => add drugs that disrupt
        the cytoskel => what happens?

        add colchicine/vinblastine/... (MT disruptors):
            2 hrs of vinblastine => neurites are gone
        
            interp: need MTs to maintain neurite structure, BUT this is too
            dramatic to be helpful

        neurons on plastic dish
            treat w/ cytochalasin - disrupts actin MFs => complete collapse of neurites
            therefore: MFs are also necessary to maintain neurite structure
                again, too dramatic to be sure
        
        now, put neurons on polylysine (basic, cells love it b/c of sialic
        acid), rather than plastic

            repeat w/ cytochalasin => growth cone collapses, but neurites remain intact, and
                                      still grow outward (but slowly)

                this tells us: 1) MFs are essential for growth cone struct.
                               2) MFs likely involved in outgrowth, but so is something else

how do you move in a directed manner?
    actin & MTs steer growth cones
        growth cone turns in direction of most stable actin filaments
        taxol - MT stabilizer - axon turns in direction of taxol
        nocodazole - MT destabilizer - axon turns away from nocodazole

    actin filaments are necessary to guide growth cones

    MTs invade the "winner" filopodia

