2013-05-07 Tues
---------------------
Lecture 10

[15 min late!!!]

Neuronal Specificity Theory
    ###

Size Disparity Expts.
    retina vs tectum
    cell bodies in left retina form synapses on right tectum, etc.

    half a retina - early(what you expect) - late: "expansion" - fill whole tectum
    half a tectum - early: one half of retina is "out of luck" - late: "compression":
                                                            the other half squeezes in

    result: clearly not a lock-and-key, or we would not get expansion/compression
        axons are retaining their _relative_ positions

Sperry postulated the existence of two or more cytochemical gradients "that spread across
and through each other w/ their axes perpendicular"
    maybe an axon needs to be high-green low-red or high-green high-red, etc.

    ephrines - viewed as ligands
    eph      - viewed as receptors "this is arbitrary, because both are
                                    membrane-bound proteins"
    ephrines repel the axons w/ eph

    in tectum (see book figure):
        high conc. of ephrins in posterior region; low ephrin in anterior region

    need two sets of gradients: one gradient set in retina and one set in tectum

somatosensory representation of the motor cortex
    topographic map
    changeable! [see slides on amputation]

summary
    1) gradients and cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) guide target selection
    2) topographic maps


--------
new PDF - lecture set 6

developmentally regulated neuronal survival and neuronal cell death

what has happened so far? (recurring slide)
    ...
    axon outgrowth
    ***programmed cell death
    ***target selection & synaptogenesis
    ...

outline
    ###

1909 - ML Shorey
    ~3 day chick embryo
        has limb buds
        can take a fine needle and remove a limb bud
        can take a limb bud off one embryo and attach it somewhere on another embryo
            "supernumerary limb"

        is there relationship btwn targets of innervation and the pool of innervating neurons?
            result: many fewer neurons in the region of the spinal cord that would
            normally innervate ###

            not very quantitative, unfortunately

1920 - Detwiler
    does both limb ablation and limb addition
    "didn't even try to count"

model:
    targets of innervation "recruit" otherwise naive cells to become neurons

    one possible mechanism ###

---
2. viktor hamburger - naturally occurring cell death
    rigorously quantitative!

    key Hamburger expts in the 1940s - reduced and extra target material

    data from supernumerary expts:
        no diff for 6 day embryos
        12d - significantly more neurons for experimental than for control
        19d - also sig.

        something here is very inconsistent w/ recruitment model:
            the total number of neurons drops 6d -> 12d -> 19d

    Hamburger proposes:
        neuron degeneration causes reduced numbers, not lack of "recruitment"
        also, cell death occurs not only as limb ablation, but as a normal feature of devel
            (received w/ hostility!)

    additional Hamberger expts in 1940s:
        <limb buds @ day 4.5; less cell death in limb DRG>
        you get more cell death when there is less to innervate

    lots more data starts being acquired

clues: cell death occurs over fairly brief window of time
    around time when growth cones are newly arrived at target

    also, all neurons appear to have equal chance of survival in the beginning

summary
    1. cells send axons to targets
    2. some percentage of them die
    ###

    maybe there is a target-derived "survival factor" which is present in
    limiting supply

    predictions:
        1. if number of neurons arriving at a single target increases, the
        percentage of survivors should go down

        2. if number of neurons arriving at a single target decreases, the
        percentage of survivors should go up

    testing 1:
        each target can support only N neurons

    ...

    what is the rationale for this cell death?
        really important to get it right, since nervous system is so important
        the expense is justified

        also an element of quality control - may the best neuron win

3. defining molecular mechanisms
    what molecules? are there lots of them? how do they work?

    originally called "trophic factors" implying a nutritive function...

    1948 - Bueker, working w/ Hamburger
        big goal: identifying the molecules that regulate neuronal cell death in devel.

        used fractionation to purify proteins - goes through sizing columns
            different sizes in different tubes
            the factor is in one of these tubes!
            how could you know if a particular tube has the trophic factor?
                inject into chick embryo and check for more survival - NOT PRACTICAL

        problem w/ fractionation - it's not enough to isolate individual proteins
        separate not just by size, but also charge, hydrophobicity, etc.
