2013-05-09 Thur
-----------------
Lecture 11

[5 min late!]

review:
    earliest model - "recruitment"
    key Hamburger expts in 1940's
        reduced and extra target material

    not recruitment! cell death
        and not just in experiments, but also in normal devel!

    cells/axons that have at least a threshold amount survive; the others die
    "competition model" - competition for a limited amt. of survival factor

3. defining mol. mechanisms

1948 - Bueker, working w/ Hamburger
    goal: what is this target factor?
    need a lot of starting material!
        why not use tumor cells? weird - sometimes make proteins they shouldn't
            mouse sarcoma 180 worked
                grew well; axons changed direction to go into tumor!
                maybe it's making a survival factor
    
    is survival factor a diffusible substance?
        put tumor on other side of allantoic membrane instead of in embryo
        still get an effect on ganglia? yes, so not dependent on direct contact

    biochemical purification:
        1) abundant starting material - sarcoma 180
        2) fractionation procedures
        3) a reliable, quick, and at least semi-quantitative assay
        they were not very good biochemists - brought in Stanley Cohen

    fractionation procedures (not in PDF prior to today):
        material --homogenize--> column w/ resin for size -> many tubes ("fractions")
        take tube we want -> another column - resin for hydrophobicity -> many tubes
        ...eventually you have a purified preparation of a molecule of interest

    need an assay:
        take dorsal root ganglia and put into culture
        with survival factor - they will put out axons overnight
        from one animal you can get a lot of ganglia

<so, what happens next?>
    preparation had both protein and nucleic acid
    Washington University - Arthur Kornberg:
        one of early pioneers to understanding enzymology and DNA replication
        PDE (phosphodiesterase) - chews up and breaks phosphodiester bonds
        snake venom

take sample --"halo assay"--> halo
take sample --treat w/ PDE--> if nucleic acid, won't get halo, but will if protein

result, treating w/ PDE gives us a much bigger halo! wtf!

new experiment: just treat with PDE -> huge halo
    hmmm, maybe PDE itself can act as a survival factor
    the preparation of PDE was crude! maybe a contaminant is responsible
    what was starting material for this phosphodiesterase? snake venom
    turns out snake venom has way more neural survival factors than sarcoma 180
    lots of survival factor in _male_ mouse salivary glands

what's the effect of NGF in a real animal?
    if we add extra NGF, neuronal cell death should decline and neuronal survival
    should increase
        observations:
            1. increased neuronal survival
            2. chemotaxis - growth of axons to site of injection (just like the tumor)
        so, prediction #1 is fulfilled
    how about eliminating NGF? no knockouts in 1960's
    first use of function-blocking Ab's!
    (at the time, they didn't know fcn-blocking Ab's were rare)
    the ganglia were pretty much obliterated

    immunosympathectomy - complete destruction of sympathetic nervous system
    no effect on motor neurons or brain

    this expt. provides physiological relevance to NGF

NGF is a target-derived trophic factor
people very happy w/ this model in the 1970's even though:
    predictions 3 and 4 had not been addressed, because of tech limitations
    no info on how NGF works
    what about CNS?
    eventually, learned how to make mg quantities of NGF...

mid-1980's:
    devel. of more sensitive assays - detect low quantities of NGF and NGF mRNA
    1. isolation of NGF cDNA for use as a probe to detect NGF mRNA on RNA blots
        (i.e., "Northern blots")
        "this was all happening at UCSF"

in Germany (Max Planck inst.):
    mAb's against NGF that were very sensitive
    where is NGF synthesized? does it correlate w/ symp/sensory innervation?
        even in adults, neurons are totally dependent on NGF
        densely innervated targets
            ~1ng NGF per gram wet weight
        poorly innervated targets
            below detection threshold (0.3ng/gm wet weight)

    in ganglia:
        despite the very high levels of NGF in these ganglia, there is _no_
        NGF mRNA! how is this possible?
            transported back along axon toward cell body
            (where it gets degraded, but a lot accumulates)

UCSF - Lou Reichart
    first American to climb K2 (also without O2)
    "a little idiosyncratic"

    found lots of NGF mRNA in a couple of regions of the brain, incl.
    hippocampus and neocortex (cholinergic); why no effects in immunosympathectomy expt.?
        couldn't cross blood-brain barrier (BBB)!

Alan Davies - England
    prediction #4 - NGF must be synth. in targets at the right time in devel.
        yes!
        but, it can't be NGF that is attracting the axons - NGF protein synth happens too late

        either another attractant or another source of NGF

    hypothesis: might the arrival of the first growth cones be a signal to start making NGF?

Dennis Clegg - UCSB:
    heart devel./innervation
    neurons innervate the heart; heart releases NGF
    if you kill off these neurons, then you prevent growth cones from ever reaching heart
    does heart still make NGF at the right time? yes, it does!
        the hypothesis is wrong
