2013-05-23 Thur
-----------------
Lecture 14

[10 min late!]

<visual system organization>

Each eye gets slightly different info => depth perception

the left halves of both eyes go to same place (left LGN), and likewise with the right halves
    LGN = lateral geniculate nucleus
    LGN => visual cortex (next neurons in circuit)

    in LGN: we "interdigitate" left and right

ocular dominance columns can be visualized using radioactivity
    follow radioactivity from eye to visual cortex
    see stripes!

    "this is in adult; what happens early in development?"
    monocular input deprivation - one eye closed during development:
            bigger stripes for the open eye

formation of ocular dominance columns
    at birth, there is a lot of overlap => separate out


---------------------------------------
Next PDF: lecture set 8 - stem cells

outline
    1. relevance to neurobiology
    2. what is a stem cell?
    ...

1. relevance to neurobio
    tools to understand neural devel
    ...

2. what is a stem cell?
    a cell that is capable of dividing many times to give rise to at least two different
    cell types (as well as maintain itself)

3. types of stem cells
    pluripotent - can give rise to most cell types in the body (embryonic stem cells)
    multipotent - can give rise to a few cell types (adult stem cells)

4. therapeutic aspects of stem cell tech.
    drug devel & toxicity tests
    expts to study devel & gene control
    tissues/cells for therapy (THE BIG ONE)

    basic therapy idea:
        use the stem cells to repair or replace damaged organs or body parts
            - isolate stem cells
            - "instruct" them to go to a particular phenotype
            - deliver to patient

    the "promise"/hope of stem cell research
        treatments for:
            cancer
            parkinson's disease
            alzheimer's disease
            heart disease
            diabetes
            spinal cord injury
            macular degeneration
            ...

    a few initial success stories w/ stem cells
        bone marrow transport

        many additional examples using animal models
            oligodendrocytes (2005)
            converted human embryonic stem cells to oligodendrocytes and helped rats w/
            spinal injuries

        how to mend a broken heart... w/ adult stem cells

    issues to address:
        embryonic -> lineage-specific -> organ precursors -> transplantation therapy
        
        problem:
            isolating human ES cells
            directing the lineage
            isolating and directing adult human stem cells
            controlling cell division (else you get tumors!)
            immunological incompatibility

5. where do we get the stem cells from?
    embryonic stem cells - from 5 day old blastocysts (pluripotent)
    adult stem cells - multipotent

    embryonic stem cells:
        advantages:
            pluripotent
            infinite lifespan
        disadvantages:
            potential for tumor formation
            ethical concerns, legal status

    sources of non-embryonic stem cells:
        brain, skin, blood, intestine, testes, muscle (maybe liver too)

starting w/ stem cells isolated from adult sources or umbilical cord blood

where do embryonic stem cells come from?
    embryo is destroyed in process of collecting the cells

history of embryonic stem cells

in vitro fertilization

but there's still a big problem:
    recognized as "foreign"
    how to make stem cells look like self?
        use your own stem cells from another source in your body

        create a blastocyst that is genetically identical to you:
            therapeutic cloning:
                somatic cell nuclear transfer

        "just this week!"
            1. remove nucleus from a human oocyte
            2. insert nuc from patient's skin cell
            3. induce devel. w/o sperm
            4. resulting stem cells are genetically identical to parent
                - well, except for the mitochondria

        how to create a "cloned blastocyst

    but what about humans?
        ES cell tech has been accomplished

    Tachibana et al., Cell 153: 1-11; June 6, 2013
        human embryonic stem cells derived by somatic cell nuclear transfer
            - gave the cells some caffeine! lolz

        the process of removing the old nucleus from the oocyte removed some necessary
        molecules
        
        hopefully this will be reproduced in other laboratories

7. induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
    de-differentiation only occurs naturally during cancer

    can we force de-differentiation?

    Shinya Yamanaka:
        1. identified two dozen "embryonic-only" genes that are active in normal
        pluripotent stem cells but not in adult cells

        2. introduce all of these genes into adult skin cells using retroviruses as delivery
        vectors

        3. adult skin cells re-programmed into pluripotent stem cells!

        4. trial and error reduced the number of genes needed to 4 (Oct4, Sox2, ###)

        ###

    cured Parkinson's w/ iPSCs prompted to differentiate into neurons
        (put in substantia nigra => produce dopamine)

    alternatives to avoid cancer risk:
        use non-retrovirus viruses that do not integrate DNA into chromosome

        or, don't even introduce genes! just inject the proteins

    <many possible applications>
        cured sickle cell anemia in a mouse

    <so... lots of potential but lots of very serious technical and scientific issues>

8. politics, morality, bio-medical research...
    2001 - George W Bush limited NIH-funded research to 64 preexisting ES cell lines
        (really only 16 could work)

    2004 - CA prop 71 - $3billion over 10 years - CIRN

    2009 - Obama removes Bush era restrictions on NIH funding

ethical standards for stem cell research - recommended by the National Academy of Sciences
    paperwork!!!!
