2013-04-02 Tues
-------------------
Lecture 1

*** read the research paper before each discussion section

on mol. bio. of the cell: "the best use of paper that's ever been done; it's spectacular"

papers:
    1. what are the questions being asked, or what is the hypothesis being tested?

    2. what are some possible answers?

    3. how can I test it?

    4. what are some outcomes of the testing?

    5. what are the implications of the answers? are they consistent w/ the hypothesis?

    6. given all that, what is the next question or hypothesis to be tested?

three review topics:
    1. a brief overview of the nervous system, because that is what we are building

    2. a brief overview of signal transduction, because signaling is what drives much of
        development

    3. a brief overview of experimental strategies ###

the nervous system
    DETECTS changes in the environment

    TRANSMITS this info to other cells

    tells other cells how to respond

what are we building? an adult nervous system w/ macroscopic "nerves"

CNS
    brain & spinal cord

PNS
    simply organized nerves

    connects CNS to the rest of the body
        31 pairs of spinal nerves
        12 pairs of cranial nerves

    nerves are macroscopic; inside of nerves: cells

cells
    neurons - receive, conduct, transmit to other cells

structure -> function
    1. cell body
        - nucleus
        - usual assortment of organelles
        - DNA, RNA, protein synth.
    
    2. axon - long distance
        single, unbranched long thin fiber
        conducts nerve impulses
            "signals" to a target
        branch at the end

        how to be less fragile?
            1. very strong cytoskeleton
                - dynamic
                - MTs, microfilaments (MFs), and neurofilaments (NFs)

            2. bundle together into macroscopic nerves

    3. nerve terminal
        synapse
        biochemical intercellular communication
            "signal transduction"

Glial cells
    outnumber neurons ~10:1 in the nervous system
    most abundant: astrocytes
    metabolically support neurons
    important for blood-brain barrier
    lots of other functions

signal transduction is key to all of development
    "cells talking to each other"

ILGF-1 and ILGF-2 are very similar to insulin, and can also bind to insulin receptors,
but not as well
    - gene families; even if you knock out insulin, you may not see much of a phenotype

cross-talk
    it's too simple that there's one ligand for one receptor

signal amplification is the main reason for so many intermediates in signal transduction

four general types of intercellular signaling
    contact-dependent
        initially, scientists were very suspicious of this explanation - direct touching
    paracrine
        e.g., NGF
        release some soluble protein
    synaptic 
        similar to paracrine, but closer and more intimate
    endocrine
        releases ligand into blood stream

focusing on receptors: 3 classes of ligand-activated cell surface receptors
    ion channel-linked receptors
        almost always hetero-oligomers
    G-protein-linked receptors
    enzyme-linked receptors
        homodimers### receptors or ligands???###

combinatorial signaling
    survive/divide/differentiate/die

    die if no signals

experimental strategies: how do we study the development of the nervous system?
    - whole animals
        most commonly rodents (rat, mouse),
        chick, flies, worms, others

    - cultured tissues from animals ("explants")
        dorsal root ganglia
        question: is NGF a neuronal survival and/or differentiation factor?
            answer: yes, both
    - cultured cells...

ganglia come from the PNS
    bag of neuronal cell bodies

question: are microtubules important for axonal structure?

cultured cells:
    primary cells
    transformed cells (e.g., PC12 cells)
