2013-05-02 Thurs
------------
Lecture 9

PDF: IV Axon Outgrowth (continued)

MTs grow and invade the "winner" filopodia

if you take cells in culture and give them NGF, so you get nice neurites, and then give
them a drug...
    cytochalasin (targets actin MFs) + polylysine in dish => lose growth cone, but still
                                                    get outward growth

                            conclusion: need both MTs and actin MFs for growth cone

need:
    1. need recognition of good navigational cues by "winner" filopodia
    2. mechanism for outgrowth of "winner" filopodia
        requires both MFs and MTs

        tension???

dynamic polymers; always growing and shrinking - actually treadmilling

inverse correlation btwn rate of MF retrograde flow
and rate of forward growth cone movement

suppose the following (made-up data):
    1. cells on a plastic dish - flux rate = 1um/hr (rate of retrograde flow (treadmilling))
                                    no neurite outgrowth

    2. cells on polylysine surface - flux rate = 0.7um/hr
                                    outgrowth = 0.3um/hr

    3. cells on laminin           - flux rate = 0.2 um/hr
                                    outgrowth = 0.8um/hr

in winner filopodia:
    integrins bind ECM (outside) and
    integrins bind MFs (inside)
        result: no more useless treadmilling! instead, pushing filopodia outward

MTs growing toward the "winner" filopodia need to be stabilized
somehow we need to crosslink the MTs and MFs
    some protein is doing it, but we don't know which

actin fibers in the central domain of the growth cone may physically restrict 
the dynamic growing MTs from invading the the outer reaches of the growth cone,
BUT the large stable MFs in the winner filopodia could make a channel/tunnel for
those MTs headed in its direction

    this may be analogous to chromosome capture by MTs during mitosis...

MAPs - MT assoc. proteins
AAPs - actin assoc. proteins
    "these are really the regulatory proteins"

MAPs -
    tau - stabilizes MT dynamics
          present in the growth cone
          reduce tau => reduce outgrowth
    SCG10 - destabilizes MTs
          also critical for neurite outgrowth

AAPs
    >50 AAPs known
    cofilin depolymerizes MFs
    AAPs promote MF branches,
    AAP tips/ends

regulation of MAP+AAP
    phosphorylation
    multiple phosphorylation sites: "turn the light switch into a dimmer"

---
what about the tension?
consider chromosome capture during mitosis:
    how does the chromosome get pulled by the MT toward the polar body? MAPs!
    maybe MAPs work the same way for filopodia tension

---
next PDF: V Target Selection

fasciculation
    pioneer axon
    later axons just ride along the pioneer
    the set of all these axons is called a fascicle

defasciculation
    <A wild type; B beat-1a mutant...>
    CAMs
        post-translational modification
        CAMs - sialic acid => decrease the strength of CAM-CAM association

visual system
    ganglion cells in the retina send axons back through the optic nerve to the tectum (brain)

    how is positional information from the retina conveyed to the brain (tectum)?
        you get a topographic map
        the growth cones of the ganglion cells have very specific targets in the tectum
        Roger Sperry
            control:
                in a frog, you can cut the optic nerve; everything on the tectum side
                will degenerate
                after a while, the whole thing regenerates, and the frog gets perfect vision
            experimental:
                1. let the optic system set up
                2. cut optic nerve
                3. rotate retina 180 degrees
                4. let regeneration proceed

                if there are sites on the tectum that are molecularly recognized by the
                growth cone, then vision should be altered by 180 degrees
                
                    this is in fact what happens: the frog with the rotated retina sticks
                    its tongue in the wrong direction
