2013-06-26 Wed
------------
Lecture 3

The concept ###

Culture: 2 simple def's:
    1. the way members of a society adapt to their environment and give meaning to their lives
    2. everything that ppl have, think, and do as members of a society

Society: a group of ppl who depend on one another for survival or well-being

Culture is Learned, Adaptive, Integrated, Dynamic, Symbolic, and Shared

Culture is Learned & Adaptive:
    biologically, humans are very altricial
        _altricial_: offspring are born essentially helpless and mature slowly

    we have the capacity to learn a tremendous amount

    but we will not survive on our own

    culture is the way we adapt to our world
        - but not all our adaptations are successful!
            ***paper assignment idea?

    culture can be maladaptive!
        1. unsustainable adaptations btwn society & the natural environment
            some forms of logging, mining, fishing, and agriculture
            many anthropologists are concerned w/ these unsustainable adaptations
        2. unjust adaptations w/in and btwn social groups
            inequality, exploitation, slavery, genocide
            many anthropologists are concerned w/ these unjust adaptations

    how do we learn culture?
        enculturation: the process through which young humans learn their native culture
        acculturation: the process through which ppl can learn a diff. culture from their own
        learning culture is a lot like learning language
            enculturation happens very naturally and comes rather easily, but it is not
            spontaneous

            acculturation is difficult and requires careful attention, sensitivity, and a lot
            of work

        anthropological fieldwork is an attempt to become _acculturated_

Culture is Integrated & Dynamic
    holism: the perspective that looks at all the parts of a system and how those parts are
    integrated

    cultures are internally integrated:
        different aspects of a culture (economy, politics, family, religion, etc.) serve
        complementary functions

        different social groups (gender, age, occupation, class, etc.) serve complementary
        functions

    cultures are externally integrated:
        all cultures are integrated into regional and global systems
        all cultures are in contact with other cultures
        cultures are integrated w/ & depend on the natural environment

    holism and internal integration:
        to understand an aspect of culture (the economy, politics, religion, etc.) you have
        to understand how it is integrated w/ other aspects

        to understand a social group (women, teenagers, factory workers, etc.) you have to
        understand how it is integrated w/ other social groups

        to understand a culture you must understand its relationships w/ other cultures and
        the natural environment

    culture is dynamic and all cultures are constantly changing

    the fact that cultures are integrated does not mean that they are harmonious!
        conflict & tension exist btwn different aspects of culture and different social
        groups _in every culture_

    cultures change because of _internal integration_
        changes to one aspect of culture or one social group will have impacts on the others

    cultures change because of _external integration_
        contact w/ other cultures leads to change
        relationships w/ the natural environment are constantly changing

Culture is Symbolic & Shared
    culture is a shared system of meanings (symbols)
    _symbol_: something that stands for (means) something else
    symbols can be things or behaviors
        in culture, things & behaviors bean something beyond what they objectively are

        members of a culture share these meanings and use them to interpret the world and
        communicate with each other

    ex of a symbol: american flag
        stars symbolize states
        more abstract meanings: freedom, patriotism
        to someone in North Korea, it might mean imperialism!

    another ex: apple logo
        intended meaning: sleek, well-designed, innovative
        other meanings: expensive
        but it's an apple w/ a bite out of it, wtf!

    "we dress in certain ways not just for functionality, but also to project a certain
    image of ourselves"

    ***tonight: read Spradley(sic?) article

    symbolic thinking: a way of thinking in which symbols or internal images are used to
    represent objects, persons, and events that are not present
        "I like to eat cats; they're delicious" lololol

    it's not just THAT we think symbolically, but HOW!
        we use arbitrary categories that have culturally significant meanings
            cats are pets
            pigs are food

    naive realism: "the almost universal belief that all people define the real world of
    objects, events, and living creatures in pretty much the same way"

    symbolic thinking depends on _cultural categories_ and _cultural meanings_

    the analogy of glasses:
        we see the world through the lens of culture

    we interpret everything in culturally patterned ways

    ethnocentrism: the tendency to view one's own culture as superior and to
    apply one's own cultural values in judging the behavior and beliefs of
    people from other cultures.

    sources of ethnocentrism:
        we suffer from naive realism: we erroneously believe that the way we do things is
        natural and correct (rather than cultural and arbitrary)

        we have a tendency to be arrogant and paternalistic
            probably comes from having to raise children into our own culture, and correcting
            them; we try to do the same thing to adults from other cultures

    cultural relativism: the idea that cultures are best understood when viewed w/in the
    cultural context of which they are a part

    cultural relativism does not mean that you have to _accept_ another group's definition of
    right and wrong

    rather, we have to set aside our own cultural categories and meanings to _understand_
    other cultures

    moral relativism: the position that we must accept as moral practices that are considered
    moral within another culture (contrast with cultural relativism)
