2013-07-01 Mon
------------
Lecture 5

kula exchange
    venerated objects w/ a personal history
    can't be bought or sold
    items of exchange
    objects of two kinds go in circuits of islands in opposite directions
    exchange of the two happen at the islands
    the Kula canoe is only used for kula (not for fishing)

fieldwork
    fieldwork: a style of research based on first-hand systematic data collection
        cultural anthropologists use many research methods: interviews, surveys,
        census taking, mapping, document analysis...

    the main research method in cultural anthropology is _participant-observation_

    anthropologists study ppl all over the world, and ppl from their own culture

participant-observation
    to do participant-observation you need:
        1. to immerse yourself in the culture
            learn the language
            live with the cultural natives
            participate in the native life
                eat native foods at native meal times
                attend native events and ceremonies
                participate in civic, social, and religious life
                work with the natives
            during all of these activities you need to constantly
                ask questions, talk, listen, observe, take pictures, make recordings, and
                take notes
        2. to gain access and build rapport
            access: permession from local officials and relevant governments to conduct
            your research
                - can be challenging to figure out who to get permission from
            rapport: a friendship-like relationship that fieldworkers try to cultivate with
            their informants so that they are accepted into the community
        3. to behave like a child
            you will make mistakes (and hopefully learn from them)
            have to be willing to be a horse's ass (appear foolish)
                just like children, anthropologists often learn cultural rules by breaking
                them!
            compared to actual children, anthropologists have some advantages and
            disadvantages
                disadvantage: we are no longer highly attuned to absorbing new symbolic
                systems
                advantage: what is tacit knowledge for the natives will be explicit knowledge
                for us
        4. to take fieldnotes
            "The difference btwn field work & field experience is field notes"
                - H. Russell Bernard

            *** use this method
            1. jotting: key words and quotes at the moment
                "just to jog our memory later that day"
            2. writing full notes: use jottings to jog memory and write complete
            descriptions later in the day
            3. to do lists: update the list of questions to ask and things to do

        ### skipped 5
