2013-07-02 Tues
--------------
Lecture 6

[5 min late]

Participant-Observation
    instead of farther away, get closer
    not as disconcerting
    Heisenburg effect

    Rashomon effect: our interp of culture is subjective (subject to our
    biases, ethnocentrism, expectations, etc.)
        name comes from a rape&murder where all the witnesses had different stories

    5. to be reflexive: consider your own role and impact

        2 anth'ists go to a wedding, diff. perspectives:
            if your idea is love:
                symbolism of ring, etc.
            if your idea is economic exchg:
                focus on diff. things
                    gifts, who paid, etc.
    reflexive ethnography: the inclusion in the ethnography of a careful reflection on:
        1. how you did your fieldwork
        2. how you may have influenced the culture you observed
        3. how you may be biased in your interpretation

    armchair -> onto verandah -> into their own ethnographies

    don't write ethnographies as if they weren't there; they _were_ there

    6. to survive
        culture shock
        diseases
            very often, anth'ists get sick when they first get there
        violence

ethical obligations
    primum non nocere - "first, do no harm"
        first 3 words of Hippocratic oath
        we recognize that as anth'ists we can do harm
        we collectively agree that doing harm is wrong

    we have responsibilities to a lot of diff. groups
        _priority to the researched group_
            informed consent and confidentiality
        responsibility to the Discipline
            protect anth'y's reputation (e.g., Project Camelot)
                caused anth'ists to be perceived as spies
        responsibility to the Public
            share the truth
        responsibility to Sponsors and Gov'ts
            we need to be honest and cautious

the ethics of getting involved
    should we stand up for human rights?
        ethnic cleansing, sex trafficking, slavery, systematic violence against women
        oppressive political regimes

        are human rights universal? (48% of you said "yes")
            where do we draw the line?

        do we have the right to get involved? (51% said "yes")

    should we become advocates or activists on behalf of less powerful groups with
    whom we work?

    should we try to change the practices of other cultures which we feel harm the
    environment or animals?

    *** deal with ethics in my paper

    should anth'ists work w/ the military?
        "anth'y is the handmaiden of colonialism"

Human Terrain Systems
    anth'y and the military
        starting in 2004, US military made deliberate effort to incl. an anth'ical perspective
            incl. anth'y in the curriculum
            incl. anth'ists in the war
    Human Terrain Systems
        $300M miltary program
        embedded anth'ists w/ combat units in Iraq and Afghanistan
        it's obvious that the military could benefit from an anth'ical perspective
        BUT... we are concerned about the military's goals vs the anth'ists' goals
        suspended due to controversy in 2010

Kinship Systems
    kinship system: a system for organizing relationships that is rooted in biology, but
    defined by culture
        the ways we organize & categorize relatives are cultural & arbitrary
            ex: gender matters for aunts/uncles, but not for cousins
    kinship relationships are exceptionally important!
        in most societies, kinship determines:
            social position
            the rights, responsibilities, & obligations of individuals
            who you can marry, where you should live, what children you'll be responsible for
            economic production and the control of assets

            less important in the US than in most other societies

    kinship terminology: the words used to identify diff. categories of kin
        diff. cultures use diff. combinations of factors to establish kinship categories

        kinship terminology studies suggest that a culture recognizes a kinship category
        if there's a specific kinship term for that category

        ethnolinguistic theory: the terms _reflect and affect_ the social relationships
        with kin

        most Americans use the "Eskimo System"

        seven factors used to classify Kin:
            1. Generation
            2. Relative Age
            3. Gender
            4. Gender of linking relative
            5. Lineal or Collateral (vertical or horizontal)
            6. Bifurcation (Mother's side/Father's side)
            7. Consanguine or Affine (by blood or by law)

            2,4,6 are not important for Eskimo system

        diff btwn mother & aunt in Eskimo system: lineal vs. collateral
        
        Eskimo system
            mother: +1 generation, women, lineal
            aunt: +1 generation, woman, collateral

        Iriquois system
            "mom": +1 generation, woman, mother's side
            "aunt":+1 generation, woman, father's side

            "father":+1 generation, man, father's side
            "uncle": +1 generation, man, mother's side

            used much more commonly than our system

            father's brother's children are considered to be siblings

            this shit's weird
    
    Descent
        descent: a culturally established affiliation w/ one or both parents

        bilateral descent: kinship affiliation is inherited by children of both sexes
        _from both parents_

        unilineal descent: kinship affiliation is inherited by children of both sexes
        only _from one parent_

            more common than bilateral descent

        descent groups: a multi-generation group of consanguinal kin who are lineal
        descendents of a common ancestor
            lineage: a descent group that is linked by a known relative
            clan: two or more lineages linked by an unknown or mythological relative

        patrilineal descent: kinship affiliation is inherited by children of both sexes
        ONLY from the father
            similar to American last names except that women don't change them after marriage

