2013-07-31 Wed
----------------
Lecture 21

[video (cont.): Maquilapolis: City of Factories]

structure and agency
    _structure_: the social & cultural systems that individuals operate within (the rules of
    the game)

    _agency_: the capacity of individuals to act independently and make their own "free"
    choices
        individuals have _agency_ (goals & the power to accomplish them)

        but the _structure_ restricts and privileges certain "agents"

    ***the problems in "Maquilapolis" are not with agency, but with structure
        we take these structures for granted, and consider them to be natural

    individuals are constrained by structures, but we can also work to change the structure!
        "We made it and we can unmake it"

    the question is not "is free trade or globalization good or bad?"

    the question is: "How do we use our knowledge and agency to construct the best structure
    possible?"

The structure of the free trade model
--
Free Trade is supposed to benefit everyone by increasing efficiency and developing
economies

real benefits of Free Trade:
    profits for corporations
    innovative and cheap products for wealthy consumers
    jobs for some people that really want them

real costs of Free Trade:
    poverty and insecurity for workers
    unsafe and toxic working conditions
    serious environmental problems

the idea of free trade isn't the problem, but the structure of free trade can be
improved

"The Multinationals like to say they're contributing to development, but
they come into our countries for one thing - cheap labor. If labor stops
being so cheap, they can move on. So how can you call that development? It
depends on the people being poor and staying poor"

_Standards lowering competition_: "the race to the bottom"
    1. Corporations are free to move to the country where their operating expenses
    will be lowest

    2. This creates incentives for countries to have low environmental and worker
    protection standards

if development occurs, the multi-national corporations will leave

how could we improve the structure of Free Trade?

*** my idea: organize the working class in _all_ developing countries together, in such
a way that solidarity is created. The MNCs would have nowhere to go

what is "free" in "free trade"?
    resources, commodities, products, capital, and money
    but not workers!

corporations _can freely cross borders_ in search of their best interests

but, workers are considered _criminals if they cross borders_ in search of their best
interests

the current policy creates a cheap supply of exploitable labor on both sides of the
border
    on one side, workers are exploitable because they are trapped and lack options

    those that choose to cross the border are exploitable because they lack legal
    protections

Who is responsible for enforcing environmental and worker protection standards?
    in the current system, the corporations themselves are responsible for policing their
    own behavior!
