2013-08-01 Thur
---------------
Lecture 22

[30 min late!!!]

The structure of the free trade model
    ...
    other agents have a role:
        consumers "vote with your dollar"
        governments could enforce standards?
    change the structure: include international min. standards in the free trade agreements

        min. wage, workplace safety, & environmental protection laws could be part of the
        Free Trade Agreements

Lessons from Maquilapolis
    1. structures are culturally constructed and don't always work well
    2. individuals are not powerless victims; they have agency, and can make a difference

Lessons Learned
    the lesson of collaboration & agency
        _intervention philosophy_: outsiders need to guide natives in specific directions
        because the outsiders believe that they know what is best and that the natives are
        ignorant and inferior
            common in conservation, development, education programs

        _collaboration philosophy_: for programs to be successful, they must incorporate
        local ppl as leaders and collaborators in every stage of the program

    the lesson of holism and integration
        many devel. strategies in the past have focused on only economic, social, or
        environmental goals

        anth'y teaches that the economy, society, and environment are interconnected

sustainable devel.
    "meets the needs of the present w/o compromising the ability of future generations to
    meet their own needs"

    sustainable devel.:
        collaboration: incorporates local ppl as leaders and collaborators in all stages of
        the projects

        holism: attempts to balance & simultaneously pursue economic, social, and
        environmental goals

        Ex: "the domestication of wood in Haiti"

Sustainable devel.
    2005 UN World Summit
        Economic devel., social devel., and environmental protection are "interdependent and
        mutually reinforcing pillars"

    UN millennium devel. goals
        in sept 2000, the UN set specific devel. goals in 8 key areas w/ specific targets
        for 2015
            1. eradicate extreme poverty & hunger
            2. achieve universal primary education
            3. promote gender equality & empower women
            4. reduce childhood mortality
            5. improve maternal health
            6. combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other disease
            7. ensure environmental sustainability
            8. create global partnerships for economic devel.
        all 192 member states, 23 international organizations and the World
        Bank have agreed to work to achieve these goals

        many successes, but much work remains
